4 Dividend policy
Simple Dill CF CFE
=
Motintant / Dir. CAP = FCFE/
② Multintuy
3
6/13
Dividend decisions determine the amount of and the way that a company's profits are distributed to its
shareholders.

4.1 Is dividend policy irrelevant?
MeM THEORY (FP)
Shareholders who hold the shares of a company are entitled to a portion of the income that the company
generates and of the assets that it owns. The dividend policy of a company refers to the decision taken by
the management of the company with regard to how much of a company's earnings will be distributed to
shareholders and how much will be retained within the firm.
In reaching this decision, the management of the company should try, as in all financial management
decisions, to maximise the wealth of the company's shareholders. However, there is little agreement as to
the impact of dividend policy on shareholder wealth, and the interaction between dividend payments,
financing decisions and the value of a company has been the subject of theoretical analysis and empirical
investigation.
At one end of the debate, Modigliani and Miller have maintained that the dividend policy of a corporation is
irrelevant because the value of a company is not affected by its financial policy.
Suppose a company pays dividends without changing investment and financing policies. The money that
the company will pay as dividends has to come from somewhere else. If the company maintains the
amount of debt (does not borrow to pay the dividend), the company needs to issue new shares to finance
the dividend. The new shareholders will pay only what the shares are worth, and the old shareholders will
receive the money paid by the new shareholders as dividends. After the dividend is paid, the value per
share should be equal to the old price minus the dividend paid by the new shareholders. The value of the
firm remains the same, but money changed hands from new to old shareholders. Dividend policies are
therefore irrelevant.

4.2 Ways of paying dividend
Companies have many ways of returning money to the shareholders. The main ones are:
(a) Cash dividends. This the most common way of paying dividends by corporations. These dividends
are paid in cash, usually quarterly. Companies can declare both regular and 'extra' dividends.
Regular dividends usually remain unchanged in the future, but 'extraordinary' or 'special' dividends
are unlikely to be repeated.
(b)

Dividends in the form of shares. These are paid instead of cash dividends by allocating shares of
equivalent value to existing shareholders. Shareholders receive new shares in the corporation as a
form of a dividend. Like a 'share split', the number of shares increases, but no cash changes
hands.
(c)
Share repurchases. This is an alternative way to distribute cash to shareholders. The firm buys
back its own shares. This can be done on the open market, by tender offer or by buying stock
from major shareholders.
A major difference between dividends and share repurchases is their tax treatment. Cash dividends are taxed
as income but share repurchases are subject to capital gains tax only if a capital gain has been realised.
Both cash and stock dividends reduce the value per share.
4.3 Dividend capacity (Single) ①
6/13
The dividend capacity of a corporation determines how much of a company's income can be paid out as
dividend. The dividend capacity of the company is also known as the free cash flow to equity (FCFE).
The estimation of dividend capacity of a firm is dealt with in Chapter 4. Here we simply give the definition
of the FCFE.
FCFE = Net income (EBIT – net interest – tax paid)
add
Depreciation
less
Total net investment
(change in capital investment + change in working capital)
add
Net debt issued (new borrowings less any repayments)
add
Net equity issued (new issues less any equity repurchases)
The FCFE represents the cash available to the company which could be paid out to shareholders as
dividends.
The FCFE is usually not the same as actual dividends in a given year because normally the management of
a company deliberately smoothes dividend payments over time. There are also rules which restrict the
payment of distributable profits only as dividends.
4.4 Theories of dividend policy
The Modigliani and Miller argument that dividend policy is irrelevant should have led to a random pattern
of dividend payments. In practice, dividend payments tend to be smoothed over time. In this section we
review some of the reasons that have been put forward as explanation for the payment of dividends.
4.4.1 The residual theory of dividend payments
According to this theory, firms will only pay dividends if all the profitable investment opportunities have
been funded. This theory assumes that internal funds are the cheapest source of financing, and the
company will resort to external financing only if the available internal funds, current and retained earnings
have been exhausted.

4.4.2 Target payout ratio
According to the target payout theory, companies pay out as dividends a fixed proportion of their
earnings. Firms have long-run target dividend payout ratios.
(a) Mature companies with stable earnings usually have a higher dividend payout ratio than growth
companies.
(b)

Managers focus more on dividend changes than absolute amounts.
(c)
Transitory changes in earnings usually do not affect dividend payouts.
(d)
Only long-term shifts in earnings can be followed by changes in dividends.
(e) Managers are reluctant to change dividend payout ratios due to the potential signals that such
changes may send to the markets (see below).
4.4.3 Dividends as signals
Dividends can be used to convey good (or bad) information. A firm that increases its dividend payout ratio
may be signalling that it expects future cash flows to increase, as this ratio tends to remain steady over time.
Bad firms can also increase dividends to try to convince the markets that they too are expecting increased
future cash flows. However, this increase may be unsustainable if the promised increases do not occur and
the inevitable reduction in dividend payout ratio will mean heavy penalties from the markets.
4.4.4 Agency theory
Dividend payments can be an instrument to monitor managers. When firms pay dividends they often need
to subsequently go to the capital markets to fund the projects. When firms go to the financial markets they
will be scrutinised by different market participants. For instance, investors will require an analysis of the
creditworthiness of the firm. Companies often announce dividend payments in conjunction with trying to
raise new capital.
4.4.5 Dividends and taxes
A final theory explaining dividend payments is based on the presence of different corporate and personal
taxes on one hand and of different income and capital gains taxes on the other. Modigliani and Miller
assume that there are no personal taxes. Taxes on dividends (ordinary income) are higher than taxes on
capital gains. Thus, under the presence of personal taxes, companies should not pay dividends because
investors require a higher return to companies that pay dividends. If payments are to be made to
shareholders, the company should opt for other alternatives, such as share repurchases. This is true if
taxes on dividend income are higher than taxes on capital gains.
However, different investors have different tax rates. High tax-rate individuals will prefer the firm to invest
more, whereas low tax individuals may prefer that the firm does not invest and instead pays dividends.
Investors try to select companies with dividend policies that approximate their requirements.
Dividend capacity and dividend policy were also covered in Chapter 1, Section 4 and are considered
further in Chapter 4.
June 2013 Question 4 asked about the dividend policies of a company and its potential investments.

2
10 Dividend capacity Multinational 12/10, 6/13
The dividend capacity of a multinational company depends on its after-tax profits, investment plans and
foreign dividends.
There was a six-mark section in June 2013 Question 4 asking students to calculate the level of increase in
dividends from overseas investments that would raise the investing company's dividend capacity by 10%.
We have introduced the concept of the dividend capacity of an organisation above. Here we extend the
treatment to the case of a multinational company and highlight the role of special factors, such as
remittances from subsidiaries and the timing of payments.
The potential dividend that can be paid, ie the dividend capacity of the firm, can be estimated as follows.

FORMAT
Operating cash flows from domestic operations
Depreciation
Dividends from foreign affiliates and subsidiaries
plus
plus
plus
Net equity issuance (ie new issues net of repurchases)
Net debt issuance (ie new borrowing net of repayment)
Interest payments on debt, less any interest income
Taxes
plus
less
less
less
Net investment in non-current assets (net of asset sales)
less
Net investment in working capital, inclusive of cash and marketable securities.
Dividend capacity, or FCFE, represents dividends that could be paid to shareholders. This is usually not the
same as actual dividends in a given vear because normally the management of a company deliberately
smoothes dividend payments across time. In the rest of this section we look in greater detail at three of
the factors: total net investment, share repurchases and foreign dividends.
You should know how the various parts of the FCFE equation affect dividend capacity.
10.1 Effect of investment plans
Total net investment is the single most important factor in determining dividend payouts to the
shareholders. According to pecking order hypothesis, funding investments with internal funds is the first
choice of management, followed by borrowing or share issues. Consequently, fast-growing companies
would be associated with low dividend distributions.
10.2 Effect of share repurchases
A company that opts to repurchase its shares transfers funds from the company to the shareholders. The
repurchase is financed from the firm's distributable reserves. The effect of a share repurchase is to
increase the earnings per share, as the number of issued shares is reduced. The evidence suggests that
markets react favourably to announcements of share repurchases. The rationale for the positive reaction is
that when there are no investment opportunities then it is preferable for the excess cash to be returned to
shareholders rather than to be retained within the company.
Share repurchases as a method of distribution represented a larger amount than dividends in the US. The
reason for this is the more favourable tax treatment of share repurchases, which is subject to capital gains
tax, whereas dividend payments are subject to income tax which is higher.
10.3 Dividends from overseas operations
Corporations paying dividends to common shareholders could, for example, fund these payments by
triggering repatriations. Repatriations help parent companies meet their financing needs as larger
dividends to external shareholders are associated with larger dividend repatriations inside the firm, and
highly levered parent companies with profitable domestic investment opportunities draw more heavily on
the resources of their foreign affiliates. In fact, dividend repatriations represent sizeable financial flows for
the US companies. For example in 1999 US corporations listed in Compustat paid $198 billion in
dividends to common shareholders and foreign affiliates of US multinational firms repatriated $97 billion
to the US as dividends.
The importance of repatriated dividends is not limited to quoted companies, which it may be argued face
pressure from the markets to distribute dividends to shareholders. Even private companies rely heavily on
their overseas subsidiaries to finance dividend distributions. The evidence suggests that this is happening
even when dividend repatriation is not tax efficient.

11 Dividend repatriation policies (Donat Ignore)
The amount of dividends subsidiaries pay to the parent company depend on the parent company's
dividend policies, financing needs, taxation and managerial control.
The choice of whether to repatriate earnings from a foreign subsidiary is one of the most important
decisions in multinational financial management. As mentioned in the previous section, dividend
repatriations represent significant financial flows for parent companies and contribute to dividend
payments. The factors that affect dividend repatriation policies can be grouped as follows.
Financing factors
(a)
Tax factors
(b)
(c)
Managerial factors
(d) Timing factors
11.1 Financing factors
The factors that shape repatriation dividend policy within the multinational firm are the payment of
dividends to external shareholders, the level of investment planned by the parent company, after-tax
profits and financing policies.
Repatriation policies may reflect financing concerns of parents who draw on subsidiary cash flows to
finance domestic expenses. Two examples of such domestic expenses are dividend payments to external
shareholders and capital expenditures in the home countries.
11.2 Investment financing
Dividend repatriations from foreign affiliates may offer an attractive source of finance for domestic
investment expenditures, despite possible associated tax costs, especially when alternative forms of
finance are costly. This is true for parent companies with profitable domestic investment opportunities that
already maintain large amounts of external debt and do not wish to increase the level of borrowing even
further. Another case is when companies need to expand fast into areas and profitability is not sufficient to
finance the expansion.
One of the strong implications of the US tax treatment of foreign income is that US multinational
corporations should not simultaneously remit dividends from low-tax foreign locations and transfer equity
funds into the same foreign locations. Doing so generates a home-country tax liability that could be easily
avoided simply by reducing both dividends and equity transfers.
11.3 Dividend policy
Dividend repatriations from foreign affiliates may also offer an attractive source of finance for
payments of dividends to common shareholders, especially when the parent company may prefer a
smooth dividend payment pattern and domestic profitability is in decline. The dividend payments of a
subsidiary may also be affected by the dividend policy of the parent company. For example, if the parent
company operates a constant payout ratio policy, then the subsidiary will have to adopt a constant payout
ratio policy too.
Empirical evidence shows that dividend payments to parent companies tend to be regular and
multinational firms behave as though they select target payouts for their foreign affiliates, gradually
adjusting payouts over time in response to changes in earnings.
11.4 Tax regime and dividend payments
Tax considerations are thought to be the primary reason for the dividend policies inside the multinational
firm. For example, the parent company may reduce its overall tax liability by, for example, receiving larger
amounts of dividends from subsidiaries in countries where undistributed earnings are taxed.

For subsidiaries of UK companies, all foreign profits, whether repatriated or not, are liable to UK
corporation tax, with a credit for the tax that has already been paid to the host country. Similarly, the US
Government does not distinguish between income earned abroad and income earned at home and gives
credit to multinational corporations (MNCs) headquartered in the US for the amount of tax paid to foreign
governments.
Example
Assume that the corporate tax rate in the home country is 40% and in the overseas country where a
subsidiary is located it is 30%. Assume that both the parent company and the subsidiary have pre-tax
profits of $1,000.
Taxes to foreign government = 1,000 × 30% = 300
MNC's profit after foreign tax = 1,000 – 300 = 700
US taxes = 1,000 × 40% = 400
Foreign tax credit = 300
Net tax to IRS = 400 – 300 = 100
Total taxes = 300 + 100 = 400
11.5 Managerial control
Another reason that may determine repatriation policies is the inability to fully monitor foreign managers.
Regularised dividend payments restrict the financial discretion of foreign managers, thereby reducing
associated agency problems. Conflicts of interest are most apt to arise when ownership is divided, as local
owners may influence managers to undertake transactions at other than market prices. Control
considerations inside the firm may explain the tax-penalised behaviour especially when affiliates are
partially owned.
Finally, the desire to control corporate managers around the world carries implications for dividend
policies. A multinational firm's central management can use financial flows within the firm to evaluate the
financial prospects and needs of far-flung foreign affiliates and to limit the discretion of foreign managers.
As this observation suggests, it may be sensible to mandate dividend payments to police and monitor
foreign managers, limit their ability to misallocate funds, and extract returns on investments – much as
public shareholders use dividends to monitor and control their their firms.
11.6 Timing of dividend payments
So far we have concentrated on the size of repatriated dividends. The timing of payments may be equally
important. For example, a subsidiary may adjust its dividend payments to a parent company in order to
benefit from expected movements in exchange rates. A company would like to collect early (lead)
payments from currencies vulnerable to depreciation and to collect late (lag) from currencies which are
expected to appreciate.
Also, given that tax liabilities are triggered by repatriation, these tax liabilities can be deferred by
reinvesting earnings abroad rather than remitting dividends to parent companies. The incentive to defer
repatriation is much stronger for affiliates in low-tax countries, whose dividends trigger significant parent
tax obligations, than they are for affiliates in high-tax countries – particularly since taxpayers receive net
credits for repatriations from affiliates in countries with tax rates that exceed the parent country tax rate.

4 The treasury management function
Treasury management in a modern enterprise covers a number of areas, including liquidity
management, funding management, currency management and corporate finance.
One way in which you can demonstrate competence in the performance objective 'manage cash using
active cash management and treasury systems' is to manage cash on a centralised basis to both maximise
returns and minimise charges. This section introduces the treasury management function and how it can
be used to pool cash from various sources which can be placed on deposit.
4.1 Treasury management
Large companies rely heavily for both long-term and short-term funds on the financial and currency
markets. To manage cash (funds) and currency efficiently, many large companies have set up a separate
treasury department.
The Association of Corporate Treasurers' definition of treasury management is 'the corporate handling of
all financial matters, the generation of external and internal funds for business, the management of
currencies and cash flows, and the complex strategies, policies and procedures of corporate finance'.
A treasury department, even in a large company, is likely to be quite small, with perhaps a staff of three to
six qualified accountants, bankers or corporate treasurers working under a treasurer, who is responsible
to the finance director. In some cases, where the company or organisation handles very large amounts of
cash or foreign currency dealings, and often has large cash surpluses, the treasury department might be
larger.

4.2 The role of the treasurer
The diagrams below are based on the Association of Corporate Treasurers' list of experience it requires
from its student members before they are eligible for full membership of the Association. Required
experience gives a good indication of the roles of treasury departments.
(a) Corporate financial objectives
Policies
CORPORATE FINANCIAL OBJECTIVES
Aims and
strategies
Systems
(b) Liquidity management: making sure the company has the liquid funds it needs, and invests any
surplus funds, even for very short terms.
LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT
Working capital
management
Banking
relationships
Money transmission
management
Money management
and investment
(c) Funding management
Length of time/
funds available
Interest rate
Where funds
obtainable
FUNDING MANAGEMENT
Funding policies
Funding procedures
Sources
Security
Types
Funding management is concerned with all forms of borrowing, and alternative sources of funds,
such as leasing and factoring.

(d) Currency management
CURRENCY MANAGEMENT
Exposure policies
and procedures
Exchange dealing
(futures and options)
Exchange
regulations
Currency dealings can save or cost a company considerable amounts of money, and the success or
shortcomings of the corporate treasurer can have a significant impact on the statement of profit or
loss of a company which is heavily involved in foreign trade.
(e) Corporate finance
Raising share
capital
CORPORATE FINANCE
Dividend policies
Obtaining a stock
exchange listing
Project finance and
joint ventures
Mergers, acquisitions
and business sales
The treasury department has a role in all levels of decision making within the company. It is
involved with strategic decisions, such as dividend policy and the raising of capital, tactical
decisions, such as risk management, and operational decisions, such as the investment of surplus
funds.
4.3 Treasury policy
All treasury departments should have a formal statement of treasury policy and detailed guidance on
treasury procedures. The aims of a treasury policy are to enable managers to establish direction, specify
parameters and exercise control, and also provide a clear framework and guidelines for decisions.
The guidance needs to cover the roles and responsibilities of the treasury function, the risks requiring
management, authorisation and dealing limits.
Guidance on risks should cover:
•
Identification and assessment methodology
•
Criteria including tolerable and unacceptable levels of risk
•
Management guidelines, covering risk elimination, risk control, risk retention and risk transfer
•
Reporting guidelines
The areas that might be covered include:
•
Counterparty exposure, including limits for each counterparty and monitoring of exposures in
relation to the limits
•
Currency and interest rate risk, such as hedging methods, authorised instruments and exposure
limits
•
Funding risk, including limits and targets for different sources of funding
•
Liquidity management, including permitted banks, netting and inter-group procedures

•
Investment management, covering sources of funds, authorised counterparties and instruments,
and inter-company funding
•
Bank relationships specifying criteria for the choice of bank
The guidance must also include guidance on measurement of treasury performance. Measurement must
cover both the management of risk and the financial contribution the department makes.
4.4 Advantages of a separate treasury department
Advantages of having a treasury function which is separate from the financial control function are as
follows.
(a) Centralised liquidity management avoids mixing cash surpluses and overdrafts in different localised
bank accounts.
(b) Bulk cash flows allow lower bank charges to be negotiated.
(c)
Larger volumes of cash can be invested, giving better short-term investment opportunities.
(d)
Borrowing can be agreed in bulk, probably at lower interest rates than for smaller borrowings.
(e)
Currency risk management should be improved, through matching of cash flows in different
subsidiaries. There should be less need to use expensive hedging instruments, such as option
contracts.
(f)
A specialist department can employ staff with a greater level of expertise than would be possible
in a local, more broadly based, finance department.
(g)
The company will be able to benefit from the use of specialised cash management software.
(h)
Access to treasury expertise should improve the quality of strategic planning and decision
making.
4.5 Centralised or decentralised cash management?
Centralising the treasury management function allows businesses to employ experts, deal in bulk cash
flows and therefore take advantage of lower bank charges and avoid a mix of surpluses and deficits.
However, decentralised cash management can be more responsive to local needs.
A large company may have a number of subsidiaries and divisions. In the case of a multinational, these
will be located in different countries. It will be necessary to decide whether the treasury function should be
centralised.
With centralised cash management, the central treasury department effectively acts as the bank to the
group. The central treasury has the job of ensuring that individual operating units have all the funds they
need at the right time.
4.5.1 Advantages of a specialist centralised treasury department
(a)
Centralised liquidity management avoids having a mix of cash surpluses and overdrafts in
different local bank accounts and facilitates bulk cash flows, so that lower bank charges can be
negotiated.
(b) Larger volumes of cash are available to invest, giving better short-term investment opportunities
(for example, money market deposits, high interest accounts and CDs).
(c) Any borrowing can be arranged in bulk, at lower interest rates than for smaller borrowings, and
perhaps on the eurocurrency or eurobond markets.
(d) Foreign currency risk management is likely to be improved in a group of companies. A central
treasury department can match foreign currency income earned by one subsidiary with expenditure
in the same currency by another subsidiary. In this way, the risk of losses on adverse exchange

(e)
(f)
rate changes can be avoided without the expense of forward exchange contracts or other 'hedging'
(risk-reducing) methods.
A specialist treasury department will employ experts with knowledge of dealing in futures,
eurocurrency markets, taxation, transfer prices and so on. Localised departments would not have
such expertise.
The centralised pool of funds required for precautionary purposes will be smaller than the sum of
separate precautionary balances which would need to be held under decentralised treasury
arrangements.
(g) Through having a separate profit centre, attention will be focused on the contribution to group
profit performance that can be achieved by good cash, funding, investment and foreign currency
management.
(h)

Centralisation provides a means of exercising better control through use of standardised
procedures and risk monitoring. Standardised practices and performance measures can also
create productivity benefits.
4.5.2 Possible advantages of decentralised cash management
(a)
Sources of finance can be diversified and can be matched with local assets.
(b)
Greater autonomy can be given to subsidiaries and divisions because of the closer relationships
they will have with the decentralised cash management function.
(c) The decentralised treasury function may be able to be more responsive to the needs of individual
operating units.
However, since cash balances will not be aggregated at group level, there will be more limited
opportunities to invest such balances on a short-term basis.
4.5.3 Centralised cash management in the multinational firm
If cash management within a multinational firm is centralised, each subsidiary holds only the minimum
cash balance required for transaction purposes. All excess funds will be remitted to the central treasury
department.
Funds held in the central pool of funds can be returned quickly to the local subsidiary by telegraphic
transfer or by means of worldwide bank credit facilities. The firm's bank can instruct its branch office in
the country in which the subsidiary is located to advance funds to the subsidiary.
Question
Treasury centralisation
Touten is a US registered multinational company with subsidiaries in 14 countries in Europe, Asia and
Africa. The subsidiaries have traditionally been allowed a large amount of autonomy, but Touten is now
proposing to centralise most of the group treasury management operations.
Required
Acting as a consultant to Touten, prepare a memo suitable for distribution from the group finance director
to the senior management of each of the subsidiaries explaining:
(a)
The potential benefits of treasury centralisation
(b)
How the company proposes to minimise any potential problems for the subsidiaries that might
arise as a result of treasury centralisation

Answer
MEMORANDUM
To: Directors of all foreign subsidiaries
From: Group Finance Director
Date: 1 July 20X0
Centralisation of treasury management operations
At its last meeting, the board of directors of Touten made the decision to centralise group treasury
management operations. A further memo giving detailed plans will be circulated shortly, but my objective
in this memo is to outline the potential benefits of treasury centralisation and how any potential problems
arising at subsidiaries can be minimised. Most of you will be familiar with the basic arguments, which we
have been discussing informally for some time.
What it means
Centralisation of treasury management means that most decisions on borrowing, investment of cash
surpluses, currency management and financial risk management will be taken by an enhanced central
treasury team, based at head office, instead of by subsidiaries directly. In addition, we propose to set most
transfer prices for inter-company goods and services centrally.
The potential benefits
The main benefits are:
(a)
(b)
Cost savings resulting from reduction of unnecessary banking charges
Reduction of the group's total taxation charge
(c)
Enhanced control over financial risk
Reduction in banking charges will result from:
(a) Netting off inter-company debts before settlement. At the moment we are spending too much on
foreign exchange commission by settling inter-company debts in a wide range of currencies
through the banking system.
(b) Knowledge of total group currency exposure from transactions. Amounts receivable in one
subsidiary can hedge payables in another, eliminating unnecessary hedging by subsidiaries.
(c) Knowledge of the group's total cash resources and borrowing requirement. This will reduce the
incidence of one company lending cash while a fellow subsidiary borrows at a higher interest rate
and will also eliminate unnecessary interest rate hedging. It will also facilitate higher deposit rates
and lower borrowing rates.
Reduction in the group's tax charge will be made possible by a comprehensive centrally set transfer
pricing policy.
Enhanced control over financial risks will be possible because we will be able to develop a central team of
specialists who will have a clear-cut strategy on hedging and risk management. Many of you have
requested help in this area.
This team will be able to ensure that decisions are taken in line with group strategy and will also be able to
provide you with enhanced financial information to assist you with your own decision making.
Potential problems for subsidiaries and their solution
Our group culture is one of decentralisation and enablement of management at individual subsidiary
level. There is no intention to change this culture. Rather, it is hoped that releasing you from specialist
treasury decisions will enable you to devote more time to developing your own business units.
However, the system can only work properly if information exchange between head office and
subsidiaries is swift and efficient. Enhanced computer systems are to be provided at all centres to assist
you with daily reports. It is also important that you keep head office informed of all local conditions that

12 Transfer pricing
Transfer prices are set by the MNC not only to recover the cost of services and goods provided but also to
achieve objectives such as tax liability minimisation and to offset host country policies.
MNCs supply their affiliates with capital, technology and managerial skills, for which the parent firm
receives a stream of dividend and interest payments, royalties and licence fees. At the same time,
significant intra-firm transfers of goods and services occur. For example, the subsidiary may provide the

parent company with raw materials, whereas the parent company may provide the subsidiary with final
goods for distribution to consumers in the host country. For intra-firm trade both the parent company and
the subsidiary need to charge prices. These prices for goods, technology or services between wholly or
partly owned affiliates of the multinational are called transfer prices.
A transfer price may be defined as the price at which goods or services are transferred from one process
or department to another or from one member of a group to another.
The extent to which costs and profit are covered by the transfer price is a matter of company policy. A
transfer price may be based on any of the following.
•
Standard cost
•
Marginal cost: at marginal cost or with a gross profit margin added
•
Opportunity cost
•
Full cost: at full cost, or at a full cost plus price
•
Market price
•
Market price less a discount
•
Negotiated price, which could be based on any of the other bases
A transfer price based on cost might be at marginal cost or full cost, with no profit or contribution
margin, but in a profit centre system it is more likely to be a price based on marginal cost or full cost plus
a margin for contribution or profit. This is to allow profit centres to make a profit on work they do for other
profit centres, and so earn a reward for their effort and use of resources on the work.
Transfers based on market price might be any of the following.
(a) The actual market price at which the transferred goods or services could be sold on an external
market
(b)
The actual external market price, minus an amount that reflects the savings in costs (for example
selling costs and bad debts) when goods are transferred internally
(c)
(d)
A price sufficient to give an appropriate share of profit to each party
The market price of similar goods which are sold on an external market, although the transferred goods
are not exactly the same and do not themselves have an extermal market
12.1 The level of transfer prices
The size of the transfer price will affect the costs of one profit centre and the revenues of another. Since
profit centre managers are held accountable for their costs, revenues and profits, they are likely to dispute
the size of transfer prices with each other, or disagree about whether one profit centre should do work for
another or not. Transfer prices affect the behaviour and decisions of profit centre managers.
If managers of individual profit centres are tempted to make decisions that are harmful to other divisions
and are not congruent with the goals of the organisation as a whole, the problem is likely to emerge in
disputes about the transfer price.
Disagreements about output levels tend to focus on the transfer price. There is presumably a
profit-maximising level of output and sales for the organisation as a whole. However, unless each profit
centre also maximises its own profit at the corresponding level of output, there will be interdivisional
disagreements about output levels and the profit-maximising output will not be achieved.
12.2 The advantages of market value transfer prices
Giving profit centre managers the freedom to negotiate prices with other profit centres as though they
were independent companies will tend to result in market-based transfer prices.
(a)
In most cases where the transfer price is at market price, internal transfers should be expected,
because the buying division is likely to benefit from a better quality of service, greater flexibility
and dependability of supply.
(b)
Both divisions may benefit from lower costs of administration, selling and transport.

A market price as the transfer price would therefore result in decisions which would be in the best
interests of the company or group as a whole.
12.3 The disadvantages of market value transfer prices
Market value as a transfer price does have certain disadvantages.
(a) The market price may be temporary, induced by adverse economic conditions or dumping, or it
might depend on the volume of output supplied to the external market by the profit centre.
(b)

A transfer price at market value might, under some circumstances, act as a disincentive to use up
any spare capacity in the divisions. A price based on incremental cost, in contrast, might provide
an incentive to use up the spare resources in order to provide a marginal contribution to profit.
(c) Many products do not have an equivalent market price, so that the price of a similar product
might be chosen. In such circumstances, the option to sell or buy on the open market does not
exist.
(d)

There might be an imperfect external market for the transferred item so that, if the transferring
division tried to sell more externally, it would have to reduce its selling price.
(e)
Internal transfers are often cheaper than external sales, with savings in selling costs, bad debt
risks and possibly transport costs. It would therefore seem reasonable for the buying division to
expect a discount on the external market price, and to negotiate for such a discount.

12.5 Motivations for transfer pricing
In deciding on their transfer pricing policies, MNCs take into account many internal and external factors or
motivations for transfer pricing. In terms of internal motivations these include the following.
Performance evaluation
When different affiliates within a multinational are treated as standalone profit centres, transfer prices are
needed internally by the multinational to determine profitability of the individual divisions. Transfer prices
which deviate too much from the actual prices will make it difficult to properly monitor the performance of
an affiliated unit.
Management incentives
If transfer prices used for internal measures of performance by individual affiliates deviate from the true
economic prices, and managers are evaluated and rewarded on the basis of the distorted profitability, then
it may result in corporate managers behaving in an irresponsible way.
Cost allocation
When units within the multinational are run as cost centres, subsidiaries are charged a share of the costs
of providing the group service function so that the service provider covers its costs plus a small mark-up.
Lower or higher transfer prices may result in a subsidiary bearing less or more of the overheads.

Financing considerations
Transfer pricing may be used in order to boost the profitability of a subsidiary, with the parent company
undercharging the subsidiary. Such a boost in the profitability and its credit rating may be needed by the
subsidiary in order to succeed in obtaining funds from the host country.
Transfer pricing can also be used to disguise the profitability of the subsidiary in order to justify high
prices for its products in the host country and to be able to resist demands for higher wages.
Several external motivations can affect the multinational's choice of transfer prices. Because
multinationals operate in two or more jurisdictions, transfer prices must be assigned for intra-firm trade
that crosses national borders.
Taxes
MNCs use transfer pricing to channel profits out of high tax rate countries into lower ones. A parent
company may sell goods at lower than normal prices to its subsidiaries in lower tax rate countries and buy
from them at higher than normal prices. The resultant loss in the parent's high-tax country adds
significantly to the profits of the subsidiaries. An MNC reports most of its profits in a low-tax country,
even though the actual profits are earned in a high-tax country.
Tariffs
Border taxes, such as tariffs and export taxes, are often levied on crossborder trade. Where the tax is
levied on an ad valorem basis, the higher the transfer price, the larger the tax paid per unit. Whether an
MNC will follow high transfer price strategy or not may depend on its impact on the tax burden. When
border taxes are levied on a per-unit basis (ie specific taxes), the transfer price is irrelevant for tax
purposes.
Rule of origin rule
Another external factor is the need to meet the rule of origin that applies to crossborder flows within a free
trade area. Since border taxes are eliminated within the area, rules of origin must be used to determine
eligibility for duty-free status. Over- or underinvoicing inputs is one way to avoid customs duties levied on
products that do not meet the rule of origin test.
Exchange control and quotas
Transfer pricing can be used to avoid currency controls in the host country. For example, a constraint in
profit repatriation could be avoided by the parent company charging higher prices for raw materials, or
higher fees for services provided to the subsidiary. The parent company will have higher profits and a
higher tax liability and the subsidiary will have lower profitability and a lower tax liability.
When the host country restricts the amount of foreign exchange that can be used to import goods, then a
lower transfer price allows a greater quantity of goods to be imported.
13 Regulation of transfer pricing
MNCs have to adhere to pricing guidelines to prevent exploitation of the host country.
13.1 The problem of transfer price manipulation
As we have discussed in the previous section, transfer pricing is a normal, legitimate and, in fact, required
activity. Firms set prices on intra-firm transactions for a variety of perfectly legal and rational internal
reasons and, even where pricing is not required for internal reasons, governments may require it in order
to determine how much tax revenues and customs duties are owed by the MNC. Transfer price
manipulation, on the other hand, exists when MNCs use transfer prices to evade or avoid payment of
taxes and tariffs, or other controls that the Government of the host country has put in place.
Governments worry about transfer price manipulation because they are concerned with the loss of
revenues through tax avoidance or evasion and they dislike the loss of control. Overall MNC profits after
taxes may be raised by either under- or overinvoicing the transfer price; such manipulation for tax

purposes, however, comes at the expense of distorting other goals of the firm; in particular, evaluating
management performance.
Case Study
'In November 2012, Starbucks's head of finance was forced to portray his company as a perennial
commercial flop, in order to account for its peculiar failure to record a taxable profit in the UK for 14 of the
last 15 years.
Starbucks said that it sourced UK coffee from its wholesale trading subsidiary in Switzerland. That may
be sensible commercially – it's cheaper to have one team responsible for sourcing all of Starbucks' coffee
… but it is hard to escape the conclusion that Switzerland would not be a major centre for coffee trading in
the first place if it did not charge a lowly 12% tax rate on the trading profits.'
Starbucks also charges its UK operations for use of its brand name, technology and engineering support.
'Transfer pricing is not a new problem… and is perfectly legitimate so long as they are done at an arm's
length fair market price.'
Starbucks points to the fact that franchise operators in the UK willingly pay these charges and that this is
'the same fee it charges its own loss making business in the UK'.
(Source: 'Corporate tax avoidance: how do companies do it?', BBC website 4 Dec 2012)